\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename enwc.info
@settitle ENWC Manual
@c %**end of header

@include version.texi
@include fdl.texi

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* ENWC: (enwc).         The Emacs Network Client.
@end direntry

@copying
This manual is for ENWC, the Emacs Network Client.

Copyright (C) 2012,2013,2014 Ian Dunn

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title  ENWC
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for @code{enwc} version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author by Ian Dunn

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying{}
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top ENWC

@insertcopying

This manual is for ENWC, the Emacs Network Client.

This is edition @value{EDITION}, for @code{enwc} version @value{VERSION}
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::        Overview of ENWC.
* Setup::               Getting ready to use ENWC.
* Configuration::       All of the configuration options.
* Commands::            The commands that ENWC uses.
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

ENWC is the Emacs Network Client.  It uses several backends to allow the user to control network connections through GNU Emacs, while still allowing control to remain with the actual network manager.  ENWC makes uses of the D-Bus interfaces provided by these network managers.

@node Setup
@chapter Setup

First, the path to ENWC must be added to the @var{load-path} variable.  Then, in the @file{.emacs} file, the following must be added:

@lisp
(require 'enwc-setup)
(enwc-setup)
@end lisp

Now, simply press @kbd{M+x}, and type @kbd{ENWC}, and press @kbd{RET}.  ENWC will begin scanning for networks on the wireless interface, and display them in its buffer.

@bye
